---

title: 'Creative Design Workflows: Parametric Explorations through
Physics-based Simulations'

ShowProject : true

date: 'JUNE 03, 2019'

excerpt: 'This article demonstrates how we used computational design
tools to realise a unique and innovative typology for a soffit, in
Fremantle, Western Australia.'

cover_image: '/images/posts/Physics_based_Simulations/cover_image.jpg' 

tags: ["Public Art", "Generative Design", "Simulation", "Grasshopper",
"Kangaroo", "Computational Design", "Form Finding", “Workflows”,
“Anemoi”]

---

This article demonstrates how we used computational design tools to
realise a unique and innovative typology for a soffit in Fremantle,
Western Australia.

*Link to project:*

<div >
	<iframe class="VideoMD"  src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/r8dZF_wLPpo" title="If/Lab YouTube Video Player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

**Form Finding Techniques in Architecture and Design**

In recent years, the rise of computational tools in architecture and
design industries has resulted in new and innovative ways to realise
forms. These new methods of design are allowing architects and designers
to disrupt the status-quo, and instead enable the generation of new
typologies.

These new design opportunities are often referred to as ‘parametric
design’, ‘generative design’ or ‘algorithmic design’. Each of these
terms can be used interchangeably, depending on which definition you go
by.

> “Generative design, can be described as a design method where
> generation of form is based on rules or algorithms, often deriving
> from computational tools, such as Processing, Rhinoceros, Grasshopper
> and other scripting platforms.” (Asterios Agkathidis)

**Creative Application of Computational Design for Form Finding**

The form finding process for the Liv Apartments artwork soffit involved
preparing a custom script within a physics-based software, Kangaroo ,
which was used to simulate a sail blowing in the wind. The surface was
hung from the soffit of the entrance corridor and then the wind
simulation was used to generate the unique form.

The entire project was conceived, developed and delivered via
computational design workflows.

The form finding process can be broken down into 4 steps.

1\. Base mesh: The simulation began by creating a mesh that fit within
the designated artwork area, including some of the vertical elements
(walls, columns etc)

2\. Relaxation: The next step of the form finding simulation was to
dynamically relax the mesh geometry using Kangaroo.

3\. Wind simulation: Using Kangaroo, our custom script allowed us to
simulated the effects of the ‘Fremantle Doctor’, which was then applied
to the relaxed sail-like mesh.

4\. Selection: Over 1000 iterations were produced through the software,
and due to this being a public artwork without functional or
performative requirements, the final geometry was selected based on an
aesthetic assessment of its fluid sculptural qualities.

<figure  class="mx-auto w-full ">
	<img src="/images/posts/Physics_based_Simulations/Physics_based_Simulations_2.jpg" class="mx-auto w-full object-cover m-0" alt="if/Lab Project image for Physics based Simulations" />
	<figcaption class="mx-auto text-center">
		Form finding simulation process
	</figcaption>
</figure>



<figure  class="mx-auto w-full ">
	<img src="/images/posts/Physics_based_Simulations/Physics_based_Simulations_3.jpg" class="mx-auto w-full object-cover m-0" alt="if/Lab Project image for Physics based Simulations" />
	<figcaption class="mx-auto text-center">
		Form finding simulation iterations
	</figcaption>
</figure>



<figure  class="mx-auto w-full ">
	<img src="/images/posts/Physics_based_Simulations/Physics_based_Simulations_4.jpg" class="mx-auto w-full object-cover m-0" alt="if/Lab Project image for Physics based Simulations" />
	<figcaption class="mx-auto text-center">
		Title: Anemoi  ( Greek: Ἄνεμοι, "Winds" ) is the collective term for the mythological Greek gods of the winds. 
	</figcaption>
</figure>




Anemoi is a collaboration between Artist Rick Vermey
([<u>www.rickvermey.com</u>](http://www.rickvermey.com/)) and
computational design specialist Daniel Giuffre (if/LAB) to simulate the
way the Freo Doctor moved through the Queen Victoria Street entrance
corridor.

Fremantle’s character has largely emerged from its connection with the
coast. Conceptually, our intent was to develop a playful nod to Perth’s
connection with the ‘Freo Doctor’, Fremantle’s dependable summer
sea-breeze.

Building upon this observation, we focused on the unseen but tangible
forces of coastal winds, weather systems and oceanic currents and
swells, to guide development of this soffit treatment artwork. A
cohesive abstracted sculptural form evolved, informed by representations
of wind movement and direction such as meteorological mapping,
bathymetric contours, the undulating ocean surface, charting of tidal
swells and oceanic current flows, wind-filled sails, draping fish nets,
emergent patterns in shipping route paths, billowing flags and shipping
pennants.
